README.md, before:

# 🚀 CubeSat Autonomous AI System - Full Project Documentation

---

## ✅ Table of Contents

1. [Summary](#1-summary)  
2. [Problematic](#2-problematic)  
3. [Solution Overview](#3-solution-overview)

   A. [Objective 1 — Downlink Prediction & Adaptive Compression](#objective-1-cubesat-ai-based-downlink-prediction--adaptive-compression)  
   B. [Objective 2 — Power Prediction Model](#objective-2-cubesat-power-prediction-model)  
   C. [Objective 3 — Battery Health Prediction (GRU)](#objective-3-cubesat-battery-health-prediction-model)  
   D. [Objective 4 — AI-Based FDIR](#objective-4--ai-based-fdir-fault-detection-isolation--recovery-for-cubesats)  
   E. [Objective 5 — Detumbling using Reinforcement Learning](#objective-5-detumbling-using-reinforcement-learning)
4. [CubeSat Prototype — Hardware & Cost Breakdown](#4-Hardware-&-Cost-Breakdown)
5. [Impact](#5-impact)

---


# **1. Summary**

CubeSats operate in harsh space environments where communication delays, limited bandwidth, and long blackout periods make real-time ground intervention impossible. This project proposes an autonomous AI-driven system capable of detecting anomalies, managing power, stabilizing attitude, and maintaining communication reliability without human input. By combining fault detection, predictive modeling, reinforcement learning control, and adaptive onboard decision-making, the system ensures continuous, reliable CubeSat operation and mitigates mission-critical failures.

---

# **2. Problematic**  


This CubeSat system combines five AI-driven objectives to enable fully autonomous operation. It predicts downlink capacity and applies adaptive compression to maximize data transmission using the communication subsystem. It forecasts power availability to optimize payload scheduling and prevent brownouts, leveraging the electrical power subsystem. The battery health module monitors temperature, voltage, and current to prevent overheating, supported by thermal sensors and MOSFET switches. The AI-based FDIR subsystem detects, isolates, and recovers from anomalies across sensors and subsystems to maintain reliability. Finally, the detumbling and attitude stabilization module uses reaction wheels, magnetorquers, and reinforcement learning to reduce angular velocity efficiently. Together, these objectives integrate AI models with hardware and mechanical subsystems to ensure autonomous, reliable CubeSat operation without ground intervention.

## Problem & Source

- **Power Disruptions (SEL)** – [NASA / IEEE NSREC 2025](https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20250006685)
- **CubeSat Communication Subsystems Review** – [Qatar University 2024](https://qspace.qu.edu.qa/bitstream/10576/57787/1/CubeSat_Communication_Subsystems_A_Review_of_On-Board_Transceiver_Architectures_Protocols_and_Performance.pdf)
- **Survey on CubeSat Electrical Bus Interfaces** – [SpringerLink](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12567-016-0138-0)
- **Overheating & Thermal Risks** – [NASA NESC](#)  <!-- Replace # with the actual NASA NESC link when available -->
- **EPS-related Failures** – [SpringerLink](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s43937-025-00069-5)


# **3. Solution Overview**

This CubeSat system integrates **five AI-based objectives**:

1. **Downlink Prediction & Adaptive Compression**  
2. Power Prediction  
3. **Battery Health Prediction (Thermal & Electrical)**  
4. **FDIR - Fault Detection, Isolation & Recovery**  
5. **Detumbling & Attitude Stabilization using Reinforcement Learning**

Each subsystem is independent yet complementary to enable a fully autonomous CubeSat mission.
<img width="531" height="394" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/19a9dccb-d1dd-42f1-90e4-e0ef18215855" />

---

# ✅ **Objective 1: CubeSat AI-Based Downlink Prediction & Adaptive Compression**

This AI system predicts **available downlink capacity** for each pass and computes the **compression ratio** required to send the full payload under real constraints.

The pre-transmission data pipeline will be modified in the hamshield radio accordingly.

---

## ✅ Objective overview

- Predict whether full payload can be sent  
- Compute optimal compression ratio  
- Enable fully autonomous onboard transmission  
- Maintain reliability under bad SNR, weather, geometry  

---

## ✅ System Overview

### **Dataset Generation (Simulation)**  
Synthetic datasets model:

- Orbital pass geometry  
- Free-space path loss  
- Rain attenuation  
- Antenna mispointing  
- SNR fluctuations  
- Payload sizes  
- Environmental conditions  

### **Generated Files**

| File | Description |
|------|-------------|
| aggregated_passes.csv | Main dataset (50k passes). |
| timeseries_passes_profiles.csv | Time-series SNR/range/elevation. |
| timeseries_passes_meta.csv | Metadata for time-series passes. |
| ts_features.csv | Extracted SNR statistics. |
| aggregated_passes_enriched.csv | Final enriched dataset. |

---

## ✅ XGBoost Model

### Inputs
- Pass geometry  
- Link-budget parameters  
- Antenna gains  
- Battery & PA temperature  
- SNR history  
- Time-series statistical features  

### Outputs
- `can_send_all`  
- `recommended_compression_ratio`

---

## ✅ Model Performance

| Output | Description | R² Score |
|--------|-------------|----------|
| **can_send_all** | Predicts whether the CubeSat can transmit the full payload during the pass | **0.97** |
| **recommended_compression_ratio** | Predicts the optimal compression level to apply to each data file | **0.98** |

---


---

## ✅ Onboard Compression Logic

### ✅ If data fits → **Transmit all**  
### ✅ If not → **Compress based on recommended protocol**

| Data Type | Extensions | Protocol |
|-----------|------------|----------|
| Images | .jpg .png .tif | jpeg  |
| Telemetry | .csv .txt | lz4 |
| Science/Binary | .bin .dat | zstd |

---

## ✅ How to Run

### Train model
python train_XGBoost.py


### Run full decision pipeline
python send_with_compressing.py


---

## ✅ Repository Structure
```
3U-CubeSats-Preventing-Mission-Failure/
└── Data compressing/
├── pycache/
├── compressed_files/
├── generated_dataset/
├── test_files/
│
├── compressed_files.csv
│
├── compression_engine.py
├── compression_selector.py
├── compression_settings.py
├── compressor.py
│
├── data_classifier.py
├── data_generation.py
├── extract_ts_features.py
├── merge_ts_into_aggregated.py
│
├── send_with_compression.py
├── test.py
│
├── train_XGBoost.py
├── xgboost_can_send_all_model.pkl
├── xgboost_recommended_compression_ratio_model.pkl
```

---

# ✅ **Objective 2: CubeSat Power Prediction Model**

Predicts **T+12 min power availability** to secure payload operations and energy safety.

MOSFET switches will turn off certain systems according to expected future power supply.

---

## ✅ Objective overview

Predict net available power (W) at future time to:

- Prevent brownouts  
- Optimize payload scheduling  
- Maintain safe energy margins  

---
✅ Model Performance

R² = 0.969 → high correlation between predicted and actual power

RMSE = 2.07 W → small average prediction error

## ✅ Technical Stack

Python, XGBoost, Scikit-learn, Pandas, NumPy, Joblib, Matplotlib.

---

## ✅ Workflow Overview

### **1. Data Simulation**
`generate_enhanced_data.py`
- Sequential SoC behavior  
- Rolling mean/std  
- Interaction features  

Output: `sim_power_data_enhanced.csv`

### **2. Training**
`train_optimized_model.py`
- RandomizedSearchCV  
- Trains final model  
- Outputs:
  - `xgboost_power_predictor_optimized.pkl`
  - `prediction_comparison.csv`

### **3. Inference**
`test_single_prediction.py`
- Predicts real scenario for validation  

---

## ✅ Repository Structure
```
/generated_data/
    sim_power_data_enhanced.csv
    prediction_comparison.csv

generate_enhanced_data.py
train_optimized_model.py
test_single_prediction.py
xgboost_power_predictor_optimized.pkl
```
## ✅ Electrical schematic

<img width="579" height="262" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4c01825e-ff29-4589-b705-5d6b37c87868" />



---

# ✅ **Objective 3: CubeSat Battery Health Prediction Model**

MOSFET switches power off battery cells that are overheating or overcharging.

---

## ✅ Objective overview

Predict next-step battery:
- Temperature  
- Voltage  
- Current  

Using last 10 time steps of telemetry.

---

## ✅ Model Overview

- GRU  
- 7 Input features  
- 3 Output targets  
- 48 hidden units  
- 2 GRU layers  
- Dropout + weight decay  
- MSE loss, Adam optimizer  
- ~23k parameters  

---

## ✅ Performance

| Metric | Temperature | Voltage | Current |
|--------|-------------|---------|---------|
| RMSE | 0.7283°C | 0.047526 V | 0.054206 A |
| R² | 0.9832 | 0.9741 | 0.9103 |

---

## ✅ Repository Structure

```
/prediction temp and volt/
    train_gru_model.ipynb
    generate_data_prediction.py
    synthetic_battery_prediction_data.csv
    best_gru_model.pth
    battery_gru_model.pth
    scaler_X_gru.pkl
    scaler_y_gru.pkl
    model_params_gru.pkl
    requirements.txt
```
## ✅ Electrical schematic

<img width="202" height="104" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cebd2bb7-df30-4a24-988d-b832eccdb73f" />

---

# ✅ **Objective 4: AI-Based FDIR (Fault Detection, Isolation & Recovery)**

Maintains electronic systems health through detecting and addressing anomalous behaviour.

An algorithm will determine if MOSFET switches will power off certain components and utilize redundancies or substitutary software solutions.

---

## ✅ Objective overview

Enable CubeSats to autonomously:

1. Detect anomalies  
2. Identify faulty subsystem  
3. Trigger appropriate recovery actions  

---

## ✅ Models

### 1️⃣ Fault Detection (Binary)
- LightGBM  
- Accuracy: **95%**

### 2️⃣ Fault Isolation (Multiclass)
- LightGBM  
- Accuracy: **95.75%**

---

## ✅ Dataset & Sensors

Simulated sensor data includes:
- Gyroscope, Accelerometer, Magnetometer  
- Battery voltage/current  
- Solar panel sensors  
- Internal temperatures  
- Light sensor  
- ADC  
- BMP pressure  

Fault classes include sensor and subsystem deviations.

Sliding windows of **10 samples** capture dynamic behavior.

---

## ✅ Repository Structure
```
/fdir/
  /dataset/
      sensor_data.csv
      sensor_windows.npy
      labels.npy

  /models/
      fault_detection_model.pkl
      fault_isolation_model.pkl

```
## ✅ Electrical schematic

<img width="579" height="262" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0842801c-831c-447d-8bbb-e6d4632c95d4" />

---

# ✅ **Objective 5: Detumbling using Reinforcement Learning**

Stabilizes the Cubesat and reduces its angular speed using minimal resources.
It will utilize the reaction wheels and magnetorquers in a more optimized facet.

---

## ✅ Objective overview
This module stabilizes CubeSat attitude by combining:

- ✅ A supervised **tumbling detector model**  
- ✅ An **RL agent (Soft Actor-Critic)** controlling torques  
- ✅ A custom **Gym environment** modeling CubeSat rotational dynamics  

The goal is to reduce angular speed using minimal energy.

---

## ✅ How to Run

### Install requirements
pip install -r requirements.txt



### Train disturbance detector
Run `cubesat.ipynb`  
→ saves `model_supervised.keras`

### Train RL detumbling agent
Run `rl-cubesat.ipynb`  
→ saves `sac_cubesat_policy.zip`

---

## ✅ Repository Structure

```
/cubesat-rl/
    cubesat.ipynb
    rl-cubesat.ipynb
    requirements.txt
    model_supervised.keras
    best_detector_model.keras
    sac_cubesat_policy.zip
    /checkpoints/
    /logs/
    training_curves.png
    evaluation_results.png


## ✅ Model Performance

| Task                          | Method              | Average Reward | Final Angular Speed (rad/s) | Success Rate | Inference Time |
|-------------------------------|---------------------|----------------|------------------------------|---------------|----------------|
| Satellite Attitude Detumbling | SAC (Soft Actor-Critic) | +0.85         | 0.03                         | 95%           | 4.2 ms         |

```
## ✅ Electrical schematic

<img width="597" height="485" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/34b9191e-3734-443c-8df3-9e9a1af22c3a" />

---

### ** 4.CubeSat Prototype — Hardware & Cost Breakdown (TND)**

This section summarizes the estimated cost and main components for the CubeSat prototype, including computing, communication, power, mechanical, and sensor subsystems.  
All prices are approximate and expressed in **Tunisian Dinar (TND)**.

---

## Core Computing System (OBC + AI Processor)

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense | ~320 | Supervisor + telemetry |
| Raspberry Pi 4 (or CM4) | ~240 | AI + onboard compression |
| MicroSD 32 GB | ~35 | Storage / logging |
| Industrial heatsinks | ~20 | Thermal stability |
| **Subtotal** | **~615 TND** | |

---

## Communication Subsystem (Prototype)

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| LoRa SX1278 module | 35 | Tx/Rx prototyping |
| LoRa SX1276 or RFM69HCW backup | 40 | Backup testing |
| DIY deployable whip antenna | 30 | Steel tape + SMA cable |
| NiChrome wire deployment | 20 | Burn-wire system |
| **Subtotal** | **~125 TND** | |

---

## Power Subsystem (Prototype)

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| Li-ion 18650 cells (3S2P) | ~150 | BMS board |
| MPPT (simple) | ~110 | Educational MPPT |
| DC-DC step-down regulators | ~20 | 5V / 3.3V |
| INA219 current/voltage sensor | 15 | Telemetry |
| Solar panels (small, 10–20 W) | ~200 | Local small PV panels |
| **Subtotal** | **~495 TND** | |

---

## Mechanical Structure + Thermal + ADCS

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| 3D printed CubeSat structure | ~80 | PLA or PETG |
| Aluminum rails / hardware | ~40 | Mechanical reinforcement |
| DIY magnetorquers | ~30 | Budget ADCS |
| Sun sensors (photodiodes) | ~20 | Attitude sensing |
| Thermal pads | ~20 | Heat transfer |
| **Subtotal** | **~190 TND** | |

---

## Sensors & Additional Electronics

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| TMP177 high-accuracy temp sensor | 50 | Critical thermal monitoring |
| MPU6050 IMU | 20 | Orientation tests |
| HMC5883L magnetometer | 20 | Field sensing |
| ADS1015 ADC | 55 | Extra analog telemetry |
| Connectors, headers, wiring | 30 | Harness |
| **Subtotal** | **~175 TND** | |

---

## Non-Hardware Costs

| Item | Cost | Notes |
|------|------|-------|
| Software | Free | XGBoost, PyTorch, NumPy |
| AI training | Free | Local laptop / Google Colab |

---

### 🔹 Estimated Total Hardware Cost: **≈ 1,600 TND**

> ⚙️ *Note:* Prices are approximate, subject to availability and sourcing. Components are selected for educational prototype use, not flight-grade certification.


---

# **5. Impact**

The system enhances CubeSat autonomy, reliability, and mission longevity.  
Power and battery prediction prevent energy failures.  
The FDIR system minimizes mission downtime.  
The downlink compression module maximizes data return under real bandwidth limits.  
Reinforcement learning detumbling ensures stabilization after deployment.  

| Domain                   | Traditional CubeSat | Proposed System   | Improvement |
| :------------------------ | :-----------------: | :----------------: | :----------: |
| Fault recovery success    |        ~40%         |      **>85%**      |     +45%     |
| Energy utilization        |       65–70%        |     **90–95%**     |     +30%     |
| Data throughput           |   100% baseline     |      **140%**      |     +40%     |
| Stabilization time        |       ~30 min       |      **<3 min**    |     −90%     |
| Average mission lifespan  |      1.2 years      |  **1.5–1.8 years** |   +25–35%    |


Together, these advancements create a fully autonomous CubeSat capable of surviving long-duration missions without dependence on ground control.

---

###  Commercial and Institutional Implementation Justification

The proposed intelligent CubeSat system demonstrates measurable improvements in reliability, energy efficiency, and data transmission—core factors that define mission cost and commercial viability. With fault recovery success exceeding **85%**, power efficiency gains of **30%**, and data throughput increased by **40%**, the architecture directly translates to reduced maintenance, longer operational life, and higher data return per orbit. These performance metrics align with current market needs in Earth observation, IoT, and communication constellations, where extended lifetime and autonomous operation lower launch frequency and operational expenses. Given that AI-driven subsystems are already being adopted in **ESA’s OPS-SAT** and **NASA’s Starling** programs, the demonstrated results prove that integrating such models into future commercial and institutional CubeSats is both technically feasible and economically beneficial.


# ✅ END OF README ✅

Commit message:

Enhance Objective 3 with battery health details
Added a brief description of battery health and thermal prediction.

README.md, after:

# 🚀 CubeSat Autonomous AI System - Full Project Documentation

---

## ✅ Table of Contents

1. [Summary](#1-summary)  
2. [Problematic](#2-problematic)  
3. [Solution Overview](#3-solution-overview)

   A. [Objective 1 — Downlink Prediction & Adaptive Compression](#objective-1-cubesat-ai-based-downlink-prediction--adaptive-compression)  
   B. [Objective 2 — Power Prediction Model](#objective-2-cubesat-power-prediction-model)  
   C. [Objective 3 — Battery Health Prediction (GRU)](#objective-3-cubesat-battery-health-prediction-model)  
   D. [Objective 4 — AI-Based FDIR](#objective-4--ai-based-fdir-fault-detection-isolation--recovery-for-cubesats)  
   E. [Objective 5 — Detumbling using Reinforcement Learning](#objective-5-detumbling-using-reinforcement-learning)
4. [CubeSat Prototype — Hardware & Cost Breakdown](#4-Hardware-&-Cost-Breakdown)
5. [Impact](#5-impact)

---


# **1. Summary**

CubeSats operate in harsh space environments where communication delays, limited bandwidth, and long blackout periods make real-time ground intervention impossible. This project proposes an autonomous AI-driven system capable of detecting anomalies, managing power, stabilizing attitude, and maintaining communication reliability without human input. By combining fault detection, predictive modeling, reinforcement learning control, and adaptive onboard decision-making, the system ensures continuous, reliable CubeSat operation and mitigates mission-critical failures.

---

# **2. Problematic**  


This CubeSat system combines five AI-driven objectives to enable fully autonomous operation. It predicts downlink capacity and applies adaptive compression to maximize data transmission using the communication subsystem. It forecasts power availability to optimize payload scheduling and prevent brownouts, leveraging the electrical power subsystem. The battery health module monitors temperature, voltage, and current to prevent overheating, supported by thermal sensors and MOSFET switches. The AI-based FDIR subsystem detects, isolates, and recovers from anomalies across sensors and subsystems to maintain reliability. Finally, the detumbling and attitude stabilization module uses reaction wheels, magnetorquers, and reinforcement learning to reduce angular velocity efficiently. Together, these objectives integrate AI models with hardware and mechanical subsystems to ensure autonomous, reliable CubeSat operation without ground intervention.

## Problem & Source

- **Power Disruptions (SEL)** – [NASA / IEEE NSREC 2025](https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20250006685)
- **CubeSat Communication Subsystems Review** – [Qatar University 2024](https://qspace.qu.edu.qa/bitstream/10576/57787/1/CubeSat_Communication_Subsystems_A_Review_of_On-Board_Transceiver_Architectures_Protocols_and_Performance.pdf)
- **Survey on CubeSat Electrical Bus Interfaces** – [SpringerLink](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12567-016-0138-0)
- **Overheating & Thermal Risks** – [NASA NESC](#)  <!-- Replace # with the actual NASA NESC link when available -->
- **EPS-related Failures** – [SpringerLink](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s43937-025-00069-5)


# **3. Solution Overview**

This CubeSat system integrates **five AI-based objectives**:

1. **Downlink Prediction & Adaptive Compression**  
2. Power Prediction  
3. **Battery Health Prediction (Thermal & Electrical)**  
4. **FDIR - Fault Detection, Isolation & Recovery**  
5. **Detumbling & Attitude Stabilization using Reinforcement Learning**

Each subsystem is independent yet complementary to enable a fully autonomous CubeSat mission.
<img width="531" height="394" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/19a9dccb-d1dd-42f1-90e4-e0ef18215855" />

---

# ✅ **Objective 1: CubeSat AI-Based Downlink Prediction & Adaptive Compression**

This AI system predicts **available downlink capacity** for each pass and computes the **compression ratio** required to send the full payload under real constraints.

The pre-transmission data pipeline will be modified in the hamshield radio accordingly.

---

## ✅ Objective overview

- Predict whether full payload can be sent  
- Compute optimal compression ratio  
- Enable fully autonomous onboard transmission  
- Maintain reliability under bad SNR, weather, geometry  

---

## ✅ System Overview

### **Dataset Generation (Simulation)**  
Synthetic datasets model:

- Orbital pass geometry  
- Free-space path loss  
- Rain attenuation  
- Antenna mispointing  
- SNR fluctuations  
- Payload sizes  
- Environmental conditions  

### **Generated Files**

| File | Description |
|------|-------------|
| aggregated_passes.csv | Main dataset (50k passes). |
| timeseries_passes_profiles.csv | Time-series SNR/range/elevation. |
| timeseries_passes_meta.csv | Metadata for time-series passes. |
| ts_features.csv | Extracted SNR statistics. |
| aggregated_passes_enriched.csv | Final enriched dataset. |

---

## ✅ XGBoost Model

### Inputs
- Pass geometry  
- Link-budget parameters  
- Antenna gains  
- Battery & PA temperature  
- SNR history  
- Time-series statistical features  

### Outputs
- `can_send_all`  
- `recommended_compression_ratio`

---

## ✅ Model Performance

| Output | Description | R² Score |
|--------|-------------|----------|
| **can_send_all** | Predicts whether the CubeSat can transmit the full payload during the pass | **0.97** |
| **recommended_compression_ratio** | Predicts the optimal compression level to apply to each data file | **0.98** |

---


---

## ✅ Onboard Compression Logic

### ✅ If data fits → **Transmit all**  
### ✅ If not → **Compress based on recommended protocol**

| Data Type | Extensions | Protocol |
|-----------|------------|----------|
| Images | .jpg .png .tif | jpeg  |
| Telemetry | .csv .txt | lz4 |
| Science/Binary | .bin .dat | zstd |

---

## ✅ How to Run

### Train model
python train_XGBoost.py


### Run full decision pipeline
python send_with_compressing.py


---

## ✅ Repository Structure
```
3U-CubeSats-Preventing-Mission-Failure/
└── Data compressing/
├── pycache/
├── compressed_files/
├── generated_dataset/
├── test_files/
│
├── compressed_files.csv
│
├── compression_engine.py
├── compression_selector.py
├── compression_settings.py
├── compressor.py
│
├── data_classifier.py
├── data_generation.py
├── extract_ts_features.py
├── merge_ts_into_aggregated.py
│
├── send_with_compression.py
├── test.py
│
├── train_XGBoost.py
├── xgboost_can_send_all_model.pkl
├── xgboost_recommended_compression_ratio_model.pkl
```

---

# ✅ **Objective 2: CubeSat Power Prediction Model**

Predicts **T+12 min power availability** to secure payload operations and energy safety.

MOSFET switches will turn off certain systems according to expected future power supply.

---

## ✅ Objective overview

Predict net available power (W) at future time to:

- Prevent brownouts  
- Optimize payload scheduling  
- Maintain safe energy margins  

---
✅ Model Performance

R² = 0.969 → high correlation between predicted and actual power

RMSE = 2.07 W → small average prediction error

## ✅ Technical Stack

Python, XGBoost, Scikit-learn, Pandas, NumPy, Joblib, Matplotlib.

---

## ✅ Workflow Overview

### **1. Data Simulation**
`generate_enhanced_data.py`
- Sequential SoC behavior  
- Rolling mean/std  
- Interaction features  

Output: `sim_power_data_enhanced.csv`

### **2. Training**
`train_optimized_model.py`
- RandomizedSearchCV  
- Trains final model  
- Outputs:
  - `xgboost_power_predictor_optimized.pkl`
  - `prediction_comparison.csv`

### **3. Inference**
`test_single_prediction.py`
- Predicts real scenario for validation  

---

## ✅ Repository Structure
```
/generated_data/
    sim_power_data_enhanced.csv
    prediction_comparison.csv

generate_enhanced_data.py
train_optimized_model.py
test_single_prediction.py
xgboost_power_predictor_optimized.pkl
```
## ✅ Electrical schematic

<img width="579" height="262" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4c01825e-ff29-4589-b705-5d6b37c87868" />



---

# ✅ **Objective 3: CubeSat Battery Health Prediction Model**

Battery health and thermal prediction for mission failure prevention.
MOSFET switches power off battery cells that are overheating or overcharging.

---

## ✅ Objective overview

Predict next-step battery:
- Temperature  
- Voltage  
- Current  

Using last 10 time steps of telemetry.

---

## ✅ Model Overview

- GRU  
- 7 Input features  
- 3 Output targets  
- 48 hidden units  
- 2 GRU layers  
- Dropout + weight decay  
- MSE loss, Adam optimizer  
- ~23k parameters  

---

## ✅ Performance

| Metric | Temperature | Voltage | Current |
|--------|-------------|---------|---------|
| RMSE | 0.7283°C | 0.047526 V | 0.054206 A |
| R² | 0.9832 | 0.9741 | 0.9103 |

---

## ✅ Repository Structure

```
/prediction temp and volt/
    train_gru_model.ipynb
    generate_data_prediction.py
    synthetic_battery_prediction_data.csv
    best_gru_model.pth
    battery_gru_model.pth
    scaler_X_gru.pkl
    scaler_y_gru.pkl
    model_params_gru.pkl
    requirements.txt
```
## ✅ Electrical schematic

<img width="202" height="104" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cebd2bb7-df30-4a24-988d-b832eccdb73f" />

---

# ✅ **Objective 4: AI-Based FDIR (Fault Detection, Isolation & Recovery)**

Maintains electronic systems health through detecting and addressing anomalous behaviour.

An algorithm will determine if MOSFET switches will power off certain components and utilize redundancies or substitutary software solutions.

---

## ✅ Objective overview

Enable CubeSats to autonomously:

1. Detect anomalies  
2. Identify faulty subsystem  
3. Trigger appropriate recovery actions  

---

## ✅ Models

### 1️⃣ Fault Detection (Binary)
- LightGBM  
- Accuracy: **95%**

### 2️⃣ Fault Isolation (Multiclass)
- LightGBM  
- Accuracy: **95.75%**

---

## ✅ Dataset & Sensors

Simulated sensor data includes:
- Gyroscope, Accelerometer, Magnetometer  
- Battery voltage/current  
- Solar panel sensors  
- Internal temperatures  
- Light sensor  
- ADC  
- BMP pressure  

Fault classes include sensor and subsystem deviations.

Sliding windows of **10 samples** capture dynamic behavior.

---

## ✅ Repository Structure
```
/fdir/
  /dataset/
      sensor_data.csv
      sensor_windows.npy
      labels.npy

  /models/
      fault_detection_model.pkl
      fault_isolation_model.pkl

```
## ✅ Electrical schematic

<img width="579" height="262" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0842801c-831c-447d-8bbb-e6d4632c95d4" />

---

# ✅ **Objective 5: Detumbling using Reinforcement Learning**

Stabilizes the Cubesat and reduces its angular speed using minimal resources.
It will utilize the reaction wheels and magnetorquers in a more optimized facet.

---

## ✅ Objective overview
This module stabilizes CubeSat attitude by combining:

- ✅ A supervised **tumbling detector model**  
- ✅ An **RL agent (Soft Actor-Critic)** controlling torques  
- ✅ A custom **Gym environment** modeling CubeSat rotational dynamics  

The goal is to reduce angular speed using minimal energy.

---

## ✅ How to Run

### Install requirements
pip install -r requirements.txt



### Train disturbance detector
Run `cubesat.ipynb`  
→ saves `model_supervised.keras`

### Train RL detumbling agent
Run `rl-cubesat.ipynb`  
→ saves `sac_cubesat_policy.zip`

---

## ✅ Repository Structure

```
/cubesat-rl/
    cubesat.ipynb
    rl-cubesat.ipynb
    requirements.txt
    model_supervised.keras
    best_detector_model.keras
    sac_cubesat_policy.zip
    /checkpoints/
    /logs/
    training_curves.png
    evaluation_results.png


## ✅ Model Performance

| Task                          | Method              | Average Reward | Final Angular Speed (rad/s) | Success Rate | Inference Time |
|-------------------------------|---------------------|----------------|------------------------------|---------------|----------------|
| Satellite Attitude Detumbling | SAC (Soft Actor-Critic) | +0.85         | 0.03                         | 95%           | 4.2 ms         |

```
## ✅ Electrical schematic

<img width="597" height="485" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/34b9191e-3734-443c-8df3-9e9a1af22c3a" />

---

### ** 4.CubeSat Prototype — Hardware & Cost Breakdown (TND)**

This section summarizes the estimated cost and main components for the CubeSat prototype, including computing, communication, power, mechanical, and sensor subsystems.  
All prices are approximate and expressed in **Tunisian Dinar (TND)**.

---

## Core Computing System (OBC + AI Processor)

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense | ~320 | Supervisor + telemetry |
| Raspberry Pi 4 (or CM4) | ~240 | AI + onboard compression |
| MicroSD 32 GB | ~35 | Storage / logging |
| Industrial heatsinks | ~20 | Thermal stability |
| **Subtotal** | **~615 TND** | |

---

## Communication Subsystem (Prototype)

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| LoRa SX1278 module | 35 | Tx/Rx prototyping |
| LoRa SX1276 or RFM69HCW backup | 40 | Backup testing |
| DIY deployable whip antenna | 30 | Steel tape + SMA cable |
| NiChrome wire deployment | 20 | Burn-wire system |
| **Subtotal** | **~125 TND** | |

---

## Power Subsystem (Prototype)

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| Li-ion 18650 cells (3S2P) | ~150 | BMS board |
| MPPT (simple) | ~110 | Educational MPPT |
| DC-DC step-down regulators | ~20 | 5V / 3.3V |
| INA219 current/voltage sensor | 15 | Telemetry |
| Solar panels (small, 10–20 W) | ~200 | Local small PV panels |
| **Subtotal** | **~495 TND** | |

---

## Mechanical Structure + Thermal + ADCS

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| 3D printed CubeSat structure | ~80 | PLA or PETG |
| Aluminum rails / hardware | ~40 | Mechanical reinforcement |
| DIY magnetorquers | ~30 | Budget ADCS |
| Sun sensors (photodiodes) | ~20 | Attitude sensing |
| Thermal pads | ~20 | Heat transfer |
| **Subtotal** | **~190 TND** | |

---

## Sensors & Additional Electronics

| Component | Price (TND) | Notes |
|------------|--------------|-------|
| TMP177 high-accuracy temp sensor | 50 | Critical thermal monitoring |
| MPU6050 IMU | 20 | Orientation tests |
| HMC5883L magnetometer | 20 | Field sensing |
| ADS1015 ADC | 55 | Extra analog telemetry |
| Connectors, headers, wiring | 30 | Harness |
| **Subtotal** | **~175 TND** | |

---

## Non-Hardware Costs

| Item | Cost | Notes |
|------|------|-------|
| Software | Free | XGBoost, PyTorch, NumPy |
| AI training | Free | Local laptop / Google Colab |

---

### 🔹 Estimated Total Hardware Cost: **≈ 1,600 TND**

> ⚙️ *Note:* Prices are approximate, subject to availability and sourcing. Components are selected for educational prototype use, not flight-grade certification.


---

# **5. Impact**

The system enhances CubeSat autonomy, reliability, and mission longevity.  
Power and battery prediction prevent energy failures.  
The FDIR system minimizes mission downtime.  
The downlink compression module maximizes data return under real bandwidth limits.  
Reinforcement learning detumbling ensures stabilization after deployment.  

| Domain                   | Traditional CubeSat | Proposed System   | Improvement |
| :------------------------ | :-----------------: | :----------------: | :----------: |
| Fault recovery success    |        ~40%         |      **>85%**      |     +45%     |
| Energy utilization        |       65–70%        |     **90–95%**     |     +30%     |
| Data throughput           |   100% baseline     |      **140%**      |     +40%     |
| Stabilization time        |       ~30 min       |      **<3 min**    |     −90%     |
| Average mission lifespan  |      1.2 years      |  **1.5–1.8 years** |   +25–35%    |


Together, these advancements create a fully autonomous CubeSat capable of surviving long-duration missions without dependence on ground control.

---

###  Commercial and Institutional Implementation Justification

The proposed intelligent CubeSat system demonstrates measurable improvements in reliability, energy efficiency, and data transmission—core factors that define mission cost and commercial viability. With fault recovery success exceeding **85%**, power efficiency gains of **30%**, and data throughput increased by **40%**, the architecture directly translates to reduced maintenance, longer operational life, and higher data return per orbit. These performance metrics align with current market needs in Earth observation, IoT, and communication constellations, where extended lifetime and autonomous operation lower launch frequency and operational expenses. Given that AI-driven subsystems are already being adopted in **ESA’s OPS-SAT** and **NASA’s Starling** programs, the demonstrated results prove that integrating such models into future commercial and institutional CubeSats is both technically feasible and economically beneficial.


# ✅ END OF README ✅
